Docs restructure ICP features (#4955)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/icp-features/caller-identification.md

  var whitelist : OrderedMap.Map<Principal, Bool> = principalMap.empty();

  // Add a principal to the whitelist
  public shared(msg) func addToWhitelist(user : Principal) : async () {
    if (msg.caller != controller) {
      throw Error.reject("Unauthorized: Only the controller can modify the whitelist.");
    };
    whitelist := principalMap.put(whitelist, user, true);
  };

  // Remove a principal from the whitelist
  public shared(msg) func removeFromWhitelist(user : Principal) : async () {
    if (msg.caller != controller) {
      throw Error.reject("Unauthorized: Only the controller can modify the whitelist.");
    };
    whitelist := principalMap.delete(whitelist, user);
  };

  // Check if a caller is in the whitelist
  public shared query(msg) func isWhitelisted() : async Bool {
    principalMap.get(whitelist, msg.caller) == ?true;
  };

  // Restricted function, accessible only to whitelisted users
  public composite query(msg) func restrictedAction() : async Text {
    if (not (await isWhitelisted())) {
      throw Error.reject("Access denied: Caller is not whitelisted.");
    };
    "Access granted to restricted action.";
  };
}
```

### Role based access control

> Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) assigns permissions based on **roles** rather than individual users. This allows for structured authorization, where users can be grouped into predefined roles with different access levels. In this example, the canister assigns roles dynamically, allowing the controller to manage administrators and members, each with different permissions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Role-based access control (RBAC) assigns permissions based on roles rather than individual users. This allows for structured authorization, where users can be grouped into predefined roles with different access levels. In this example, the canister assigns roles dynamically, allowing its controller to manage administrators and members, each with different permissions:
```

    if (msg.caller != controller) {
      throw Error.reject("Unauthorized: Only the controller can assign roles.");
    };
    roles := roleMap.put(roles, user, role);
  };

  // Remove a principal's role
  public shared(msg) func removeRole(user : Principal) : async () {
    if (msg.caller != controller) {
      throw Error.reject("Unauthorized: Only the controller can remove roles.");
    };
    roles := roleMap.delete(roles, user);
  };

  // Check a user's role
  public shared query(msg) func getRole() : async ?Role {
    roleMap.get(roles, msg.caller);
  };

  // Admin-only function
  public shared(msg) func adminAction() : async Text {
    switch (roleMap.get(roles, msg.caller)) {
      case (?#Admin) "Admin action executed.";
      case _ throw Error.reject("Access denied: Admins only.");
    };
  };

  // Member-only function
  public shared(msg) func memberAction() : async Text {
    switch (roleMap.get(roles, msg.caller)) {
      case (?#Admin) "Admins can also perform member actions.";
      case (?#Member) "Member action executed.";
      case _ throw Error.reject("Access denied: Members only.");
    };
  };
}
```

### Mandatory access control

> Mandatory Access Control (MAC) enforces **strict, system-defined rules** that users cannot modify. Unlike **Discretionary Access Control (DAC)**, where the owner can grant and revoke permissions, MAC establishes fixed access policies that remain immutable after deployment. This model is useful for high-security applications, where access rules must be enforced without user intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mandatory access control (MAC) enforces strict, system-defined rules that users cannot modify. Unlike discretionary access control (DAC), where the owner can grant and revoke permissions, MAC establishes fixed access policies that remain immutable after deployment. This model is useful for high-security applications, where access rules must be enforced without user intervention.
```

```motoko no-repl
import Principal "mo:base/Principal";
import OrderedMap "mo:base/OrderedMap";
import Error "mo:base/Error";

shared(msg) persistent actor class MandatoryAccess() {
  let controller = msg.caller;

  type AccessLevel = { #ReadOnly; #WriteOnly; #ReadWrite };

>   // Create OrderedMap instance for storing fixed access rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Create an OrderedMap instance for storing fixed access rules
```

  // Ensure the controller always has ReadWrite access
  system func postupgrade() {
    if (accessMap.get(accessLevels, controller) == null) {
      accessLevels := accessMap.put(accessLevels, controller, #ReadWrite);
    };
  };

  // Function to check access level
  public shared query(msg) func getAccessLevel() : async ?AccessLevel {
    if (msg.caller == controller) return ?#ReadWrite;
    accessMap.get(accessLevels, msg.caller);
  };

  // Read function (accessible by RW and R users)
  public shared composite query(msg) func readData() : async Text {
    switch (await getAccessLevel()) {
      case (?#ReadOnly) "Read access granted.";
      case (?#ReadWrite) "Read access granted.";
      case _ throw Error.reject("Access denied: No read permissions.");
    };
  };

  // Write function (accessible by RW and W users)
  public shared composite query(msg) func writeData(newData : Text) : async Text {
    switch (await getAccessLevel()) {
      case (?#WriteOnly) "Data written: " # newData;
      case (?#ReadWrite) "Data written: " # newData;
      case _ throw Error.reject("Access denied: No write permissions.");
    };
  };
}
```

### Access control list

> An **Access Control List (ACL)** defines explicit per-user permissions for specific actions, allowing fine-grained control over function access. Unlike **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)**, which groups users into roles, ACLs require manual management of user access for each function. While ACLs provide flexibility, they can become difficult to scale in larger applications. The following example implements separate read and write allow lists, where the controller manages permissions by adding or removing users:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **access control list (ACL)** defines explicit per-user permissions for specific actions, allowing fine-grained control over function access. Unlike role-based access control (RBAC) which groups users into roles, ACLs require manual management of user access for each function. ACLs are flexible but can become difficult to scale in larger applications. The following example implements separate read and write allow lists, where the controller manages permissions by adding or removing users:
```

  public shared(msg) func revokeWriteAccess(user : Principal) : async () {
    if (msg.caller != controller) {
      throw Error.reject("Unauthorized: Only the controller can modify the ACL.");
    };
    writeAccessList := aclMap.delete(writeAccessList, user);
  };

  // Check if a user has read access
  public shared query(msg) func hasReadAccess() : async Bool {
    aclMap.get(readAccessList, msg.caller) == ?true;
  };

  // Check if a user has write access
  public shared query(msg) func hasWriteAccess() : async Bool {
    aclMap.get(writeAccessList, msg.caller) == ?true;
  };

  // Read function (restricted by read ACL)
  public shared composite query(msg) func readData() : async Text {
    if (not (await hasReadAccess())) {
      throw Error.reject("Access denied: Read access required.");
    };
    "Read access granted.";
  };

  // Write function (restricted by write ACL)
  public shared composite query(msg) func writeData(newData : Text) : async Text {
    if (not (await hasWriteAccess())) {
      throw Error.reject("Access denied: Write access required.");
    };
    "Data written: " # newData;
  };
}
```

### Attribute-based access control

> **Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)** grants permissions based on **user attributes** rather than predefined roles or explicit allow lists. In decentralized applications, attributes can include **token balances, reputation scores, or other on-chain data**, making ABAC ideal for Web3 environments. This example implements a **token-gated access model**, where users must hold a minimum number of tokens to **access restricted functions**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Attribute-based access control (ABAC)** grants permissions based on user attributes rather than predefined roles or explicit allow lists. In decentralized applications, attributes can include token balances, reputation scores, or other onchain data, making ABAC ideal for Web3 environments. This example implements a token-gated access model where users must hold a minimum number of tokens to access restricted functions.
```

  let controller = msg.caller;

  // Create an OrderedMap instance to track user balances
  transient let balanceMap = Map.Make<Principal>(Principal.compare);
  stable var balances : Map.Map<Principal, Nat> = balanceMap.empty();

  // Function to set a user's balance (simulating token ownership)
  public shared(msg) func setBalance(user : Principal, amount : Nat) : async () {
    if (msg.caller != controller) {
      throw Error.reject("Unauthorized: Only the controller can modify balances.");
    };
    balances := balanceMap.put(balances, user, amount);
  };

  // Function to check if a user meets the access requirement
  public shared query(msg) func hasAccess() : async Bool {
    switch (balanceMap.get(balances, msg.caller)) {
      case (?balance) balance >= tokenThreshold;
      case _ false;
    }
  };

  // Restricted function accessible only to users meeting the threshold
  public shared composite query(msg) func restrictedAction() : async Text {
    if (not (await hasAccess())) {
      throw Error.reject("Access denied: Insufficient tokens.");
    };
    "Access granted: You meet the token requirement.";
  };
}
```

### Policy-based access control

> Policy-Based Access Control (PBAC) enforces access rules dynamically based on contextual conditions rather than predefined roles or attributes. Policies can include time-based restrictions, geographical constraints, or  multi-factor conditions. This model is useful for governance, scheduled access, and automated compliance rules. The following example implements a time-based policy, where access is only granted within a specific time window (9AM- 5PM UTC):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policy-based access control (PBAC) enforces access rules dynamically based on contextual conditions rather than predefined roles or attributes. Policies can include time-based restrictions, geographical constraints, or  multi-factor conditions. This model is useful for governance, scheduled access, and automated compliance rules. The following example implements a time-based policy, where access is only granted within a specific time window (9AM- 5PM UTC):
```
